VERBATIM extract -- ISEF Companion Guide to the 2026-2027 International Rules, pp.5-6
THIS IS THE RULES YEAR FOR ISEF 2027 (May 2027).
Source: https://sspcdn.blob.core.windows.net/files/Documents/SEP/ISEF/2027/Rules/Rules-Companion-Guide.pdf
Retrieved 2 October 2026.
========================================================================

 
Companion Guide | International Rules 2026–2027, societyforscience.org/ISEF -- 5 
INAPPROPRIATE USE OF AI 
Rule 8. for All Projects states: Artificial Intelligence 
(AI) may be used as a project resource but must be 
cited and given proper acknowledgment. A student 
is expected to do independent work and all 
materials presented must be in the researcher’s 
own words. A student may not use generative AI to 
write the research plan, abstract, poster or to create 
citations (it is known to hallucinate and falsify 
references). 
Artificial Intelligence applications are progressing 
quickly and setting policies and practices for its 
appropriate use in education will inevitably evolve in 
the next several years. The table below is adapted 
from an AHA Ad Hoc Committee on AI in History 
Education.1 This is a preliminary model and is a 
suggested policy established by the ISEF SRC and 
Society staff to help define what is and isn’t 
appropriate AI usage in conducting a science fair 
project. Affiliated fairs may adopt their own, stricter, 
policies. 
The key to this table and to our philosophy is that AI 
may be used to ideate and to generate initial 
brainstorming and research but that it must be cited 
properly and reviewed thoroughly for accuracy and 
veracity. It is the responsibility of the student 
researcher to document where and how AI is used 
and to never attribute the results from an AI prompt 
as their own words. 
As remains true in using the internet, students must 
be guided and gain AI literacy to understand how to 
use AI effectively while understanding its limitations.  
“For all its capacities, generative AI regularly 
hallucinates content, references, sources, and 
quotations. AI models are trained to identify and 
reproduce patterns, not to comprehend the world in 
all its complexity and contradictions. If a pattern 
leads to a false, biased, or imagined output, AI has 
no way to self-correct.”1 
Using AI responsibly requires a strict 
documentation process to allow a student (and the 
adults involved - adult sponsors, mentors, judges 
and fair officials) to be able to identify and trace 
where AI was used and how the student directed 
the prompts and then verified the information being 
provided.  
For human participant projects, it is strongly 
advised that students not use AI as a chat bot or to 
provide unscripted responses to participants. Even 
with guardrails in place, the AI tool may provide 
harmful advice, diagnostic, or medical information 
to participants and be in violation of the rules. 
This is most critical when it comes to a literature 
review and bibliography as it is a serious ethical 
violation to use an AI tool to generate your 
bibliography without ever having reviewed or 
consulted the articles and documents it identifies. 
“AI introduces new possibilities for fabricated 
sources; students must be trained to critically 
assess all outputs and to recognize that any 
information provided by a generative AI tool could 
be false unless properly verified.”1 Students are 
presenting scientific research as their own 
supported by their understanding from the existing 
literature. If the citations and references are 
fabricated it brings into question the validity and 
veracity of the student’s research project.  
It is strongly advised not to use AI tools for 
formatting references, however if it is used, all 
references must be verified manually by the student 
researcher.
 
Use of generative AI to support a research project 
Task 
Could this be  
acceptable use? 
Under what conditions? 
Ask generative AI to identify or summarize key 
points in an article before you read it. Use this as 
a starting point for your literature review. 
Yes 
Acceptable without explicit citation 
Ask AI to summarize a book or article in your field. 
Reproduce that summary in your literature review 
without reading the book or article 
No 
Never acceptable, as there has been no 
engagement with the book or source itself 
Use an AI chatbot as a writing tool to help 
generate and develop ideas 
Yes 
Acceptable, may require explicit citation 
depending on circumstances. Strongly 
encouraged to keep a log of your prompts 
as part of your research notebook. 
Use generative AI to initially write the research 
plan, abstract, paper or poster. 
No 
Never acceptable. This must be the 
independent work of the student. Guidance 
or refinement after the initial document has 
been completed can be done with explicit 
citation and a log. 

6 -- Companion Guide | International Rules 2026–2027, societyforscience.org/ISEF 
Task 
Could this be  
acceptable use? 
Under what conditions? 
Use AI to write initial code for your project 
Yes 
Acceptable, only with explicit citation stating 
which portions of the code were AI 
generated and with a log of the prompts. 
You write an abstract. Ask AI to sharpen the 
language but not modify, add to, or replace the 
main points 
Yes 
Acceptable use without explicit citation only 
if changes suggested by AI are limited to 
grammar and syntax 
Ask generative AI to produce a flowchart, graphic, 
or image for a paper or presentation 
Yes 
Image should be clearly marked as AI-
generated and with explicit citation as to 
how the image was created. 
Write your research paper. Ask AI to add 
additional points to your research paper 
No 
Never acceptable. 
Use AI to produce your conclusions, future steps, 
etc. 
No 
Never acceptable 
Use AI to help identify appropriate statistical tests 
or software tools. (Interpretation of data must be 
done by the student researcher). 
Yes 
Acceptable, requires a log of your prompts 
as part of your research notebook  
Ask generative AI to produce a starter 
bibliography 
No 
Never acceptable. 
Use AI to collect data and write research plan. 
Use AI to provide citations that back up your 
claims  
No 
Never acceptable. 
Ask generative AI to fix the structure or formatting 
of your bibliography 
Yes 
Acceptable without explicit citation. You 
must review and verify all citations as valid. 
• 
Adapted from: Guiding Principles for Artificial Intelligence in History Education Approved by AHA Council,  
July 29, 2025 
 
Download the table as a stand-alone document.  
 
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY 
It is of utmost importance that a student researcher 
works closely with the adults supporting their work 
to both provide appropriate acknowledgement of 
the support that they have received but to also gain 
all appropriate permissions and clearances to 
present their research in any circumstance in which 
the work is not solely their own. Working in a RRI 
laboratory, working with data that is not publicly 
available or working as a sub-set of any identifiable 
class or club project requires proper citations and 
crediting of others’ work and may require formal 
Institutional review and approval from the RRI or 
RRI’s appropriate review body before public 
presentation at a science fair. Seeking and 
receiving permissions should be done as you begin 
a project to make those involved aware of your 
intentions to produce an independent project, and 
compete at a future science fair. Student 
researchers need to obtain permission from their 
mentors before submitting their research to enter 
science fair.  It is much better to have this 
discussion and agreement before the project has 
concluded and there are intellectual property or 
other proprietary concerns that the mentor has 
about publicly disclosing the research the student 
has done via science competition. 
DISCLOSURE OF MENTORS & PAID 
SUPPORT 
There is no rule that prohibits a student from 
working closely with a mentor – whether a family 
relative, friend or colleague or an individual sought 
for their expertise in the field of study. A student 
may participate in a paid or unpaid research 
program (with compensation to the mentor or not) 
and receive private lessons, tutoring or mentoring 
support.  
What is important is full disclosure of the 
relationship, the nature of the mentorship and full 
acknowledgement of the support received in 
conducting the research. A student researcher must 
attest that they have done an independent project  
and what they are presenting is their own work. The 
documentation of their project – the research plan 
and the abstract – must present clearly what they 
have done and what support they received.  
New in 2027, all students must now complete the 
Student Support Disclosure Form 2A.  This form 
provides an opportunity to list all of the adults who 
supported the project as well as indicating any 
programs or paid mentorship that was provided and 
how artificial intelligence was used in the project.  
Society for Science does not endorse any particular 
research programs; in fact, we do not believe a 
